---
# Documentation: https://wowchemy.com/docs/managing-content/

title: "Media I Enjoyed in 2023"
subtitle: ""
summary: ""
authors: [thomas-e-hansen]
tags: [misc, end-of-year, review]
categories: []
date: 2023-12-25
lastmod:
featured: false
draft: false

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder.
# Focal points: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight.
image:
  caption: ""
  focal_point: ""
  preview_only: false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this post with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["internal-project"]` references `content/project/deep-learning/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
projects: []
---

Another year has passed, and I've enjoyed lots of different varieties and kinds
of media throughout it. In a perfect world, I would want to write a full blog
post on each of the things mentioned here, but in this annoyingly imperfect
world with silly limitations like ~24 hours in a day and the need for sleep,
this will do. I hope you enjoy this little collection of things, and maybe even
find something you want to pick up yourself. Happy Holidays!  : )

{{< toc >}}


## Music

In general, I've continued to explore the amazing, slightly melancholic and
bittersweet world of post-rock. It strikes a special chord with me, though I
can't quite explain why. Sad yet comforting; maybe you know the feeling, or
maybe I'm just talking nonsense. Anyway, here's ~~wonderwall~~ some album/band
recommendations:

### Solkyri

Solkyri was a band I had never heard of, but they opened for We Lost The Sea on
tour this year. Opening bands can be hit or miss, in my experience, but Solkyri
were really solid and I'll be trying to catch them live in the future when I
have the opportunity to.

I've acquired 2 of their albums so far:

* "Mount Pleasant", which is their most recent album and hence also the one they
    played more tracks from at the concert. "Pendock and Progress" was their
    opening track at the concert, and is really nice. Bit more of a guitar solo
    feel than most post-rock tracks, and the album in general feels a bit more
    grunge/alt-rock (maybe? I'm not super good with genres), but it is a good
    album and one that I keep coming back to several months after the concert
    happened.
* "Are You My Brother?" is an older (2013) album of theirs. It is more
    classic/soft post-rock, which I personally really like. I find myself
    reaching for it whenever I want something nice, uplifting, and relaxing,
    whilst still being post-rock (so not too relaxing, I guess ^^). There is one
    track with vocals, which some post-rock fans will like and some won't; I
    quite like it, and the album in general.

### Drif (Heilung)

Heilung is a fun and somewhat esoteric band. I was introduced to their music via
the video game "Hellblade: Senua's Sacrifice" --- a Viking-/Old-Norse-inspired,
story driven hack-n-slash --- and have since found myself enjoying the music a
lot more than I expected. "Drif" is their most recent album, and although the
poetry readings are somewhat weird (but there's only one of them), it brings a
different, more evolved sound to previous albums like "Lifa". If you're
interested in trying something new; something which plausibly sounds like it
could have been coming from the haar-covered shores before a raid, or
sang/chanted at some old Germanic ritual (Heilung themselves calls their style
"amplified history"); without the neo-n*zi associations which unfortunately also
tend to come with that; then give Heilung a try. (Heilung, as far as I can tell,
have been very good at removing fans which do not follow the first line of their
Opening Ceremony: "Remember that we all are brothers".)

I'd recommend starting with "Lifa" or maybe the 2 first tracks on "Drif". 

### My Little, Safe Space (Six Days of Rest)

### ÁTTA (Sigur Rós)

ÁTTA, 8 in Icelandic, is the latest album by post-rock legends Sigur Rós. It is
a very fleeting and drifty album, a departure from their previous couple of
albums, which have used a lot of distortion. If you're familiar with Sigur Rós,
ÁTTA is a bit like () but with a more generally uplifting sound and more piano.
The fourth track, "Klettur", builds up these absolutely fantastic small tensions
using dissonance, and then the chorus resolves them all with a beautiful harmony
that just washes over you. It's phenomenal!

ÁTTA can be listened to both in the background and in a more focused session,
and in both cases, I've found, leaves you feeling refreshed and at least a bit
happier.

### Triumph & Disaster (We Lost The Sea)

We Lost The Sea were my first introduction to post-rock (the YouTube channel
"WorldHasPostRock" included "A Gallant Gentlemen" as part of one of their
collections) and I don't think I've loved a genre that fast in a long time. So
they hold a special place in my heart.

Now. Where "Departure Songs" was an album inspired by the perseverance and
enduring curiosity of humanity in spite of extreme risk and tragic accidents,
making the album highly cathartic and comforting in its own bittersweet
post-rock way, "Triumph & Disaster" is not exactly that. The opening paragraph
of the album description reads:

> Triumph & Disaster is a post-apocalyptic view on the collapse of the world
> told like a children’s story and illustrated through the eyes of a mother and
> her son as they spend one last day on Earth. The music is the narrative for
> the destruction and tragedy. The words tell the story of love, loss and
> letting go. 

If that immediately brought your mood down, yeah it tends to have that effect
(sorry!). Triumph & Disaster is an intense album, to say the least, both
thematically and musically. The very first notes on the album are harsh, almost
air-siren-like (but make it metal), and they slowly fade in and out of the music
for _seven minutes_ of the first track (which is 15 minutes long; I love this
genre ^^). On one hand, it's somewhat jarring. But on the other, as ever with
WLTS, boy does it ever nicely set the tone for the rest of the album's
"journey".

That's not to say that there aren't nice tracks on the album, far from it! The
remaining half of the first track is softer (although the opening harshness does
make a comeback towards the end of the track), and this is a common theme
throughout the album. There are some soft tracks in the middle of it, but most
of the tracks blend post-rock and that more metal-y harshness; the album tells a
tragic, haunting narrative, and the music reflects that. It's actually really
cool.

I love this album, I genuinely do, but the intensity of its story, how the music
tells it, and the at times overwhelming soundscape means it is not something I
listen to lightly, in the background. And I often need to just sit for a bit
after listening to it. It's a tragic story, but it's just so well done...

Reading back over that, if I've somehow convinced you to listen to this, because
it is actually fantastic music, rather than you just going "I'm good. Do you
need a hug?", then yay!  ^^;;

Also, be sure to listen to the combination of the album's poem/story and the
track "Dust", on YouTube: "Triumph & Disaster - Are we really too late?" This
combination is not included on the album (I don't know why, it is such a good
way to go through the album's accompanying text), but it is once again really
well done and sets the tone for the album.


## Video Games

Acquiring a Steam Deck around New Year's 2022-2023 has been a game changer (heh)
in terms of me actually relaxing and playing video games, rather than using my
laptop, which is also my work device, and ending up stressed and not knowing
what to play. The Deck is easy to take out and take with you, it does media
playback thanks to actually being a complete Linux "laptop" in disguise, and
with a dock, wireless mouse+keyboard, and an external DVD/BluRay drive, it even
works as a media PC. Sure, you're not going to play competitive Counter Strike
or DotA2 on it, but for everything else, it's fantastic and runs any game I've
thrown at it surprisingly well (and definitely at playable quality).

And here are some games I played on it:

### Sayonara Wild Hearts

<details>

<summary>Epilepsy disclaimer</summary>

If you have some form of photosensitive epilepsy, I'm really sorry to say that
it is extremely unlikely that you will be able to play Sayonara Wild Hearts. The
game _heavily_ uses strobing and flashing lights in various neon colours, often
contrasting ones (for example flashing bright orange on top of a generally
purple scene), to an extent that might make some non-epilepsy-sensitive people
dazed. And there are sadly no settings or mods which change this. I'm genuinely
sad about this, because it has both great gameplay and music, and I wish more
people could experience it...

</details>

"Sayonara Wild Hearts" I found via an Architect of Games recommendation video.
I picked it up not knowing what to expect, other than other people liking it and
it being an indie game (which usually is indicative of a
fun/fresh/interesting/good/all-of-the-above game). And did it ever deliver!
Sayonara Wild Hearts can only be described as so. much. _raw. **fun!**_

The game is an interactive album with a neon-purple and -pink
vaporwave/cyberpunk colour scheme. The music is _fantastic_. Go listen to the
opening/menu track "Sayonara Wild Heart" by Daniel Olsén, and if you like the
beat, if you find that track fun, if you get hyped, then go pick up the game
right now and come back once you've stopped grinning from playing it ^^

The whole game _pulses_ with energy to the beat, the music is simply fun,
and the gameplay mechanics and scenarios constantly surprise you in the best of
ways. You drift through space, skate along a breaking-up motorway, fly through
meteors, and I'll stop there because I'll spoil too many things and it needs to
be experienced. It is a rhythm game at its core, but not a difficult one, and
the game constantly introduces new mechanics and then takes them away before
they become boring, which gives it a great drive. Sayonara Wild Hearts was the
first time in forever that I found myself grinning from ear to ear within
minutes. And that lasted throughout the game.

I have over 20 hours in this game which is effectively a 1-hour-ish interactive
album. And although I love the music, the vast majority of those hours are
because the gameplay is just nice and such fun to revisit!

### The Past Within

For anyone familiar with the Rusty Lake game studio and their unnerving puzzle
games, "The Past Within" is yet another wonderful instalment in the series. It
requires 2 players on separate devices (with 2 separate copies of the game),
making it ideal for playing whilst hanging out with a partner or puzzle-liking
friend. You return to your father's old cabin by the lake to explore his lab and
solve the puzzles to potentially bring him back (whatever that may mean). One
player is in the past of the setting and another in the present, and you must
communicate what you see on your screen to solve the puzzles; very simple, yet
fun and collaborative. A game takes probably 30 minutes to 1 hour, depending on
your communication skills and puzzle-solving-ability, and since there are
multiple puzzles and sides to the story, it is also replayable. Well worth the
£7 or so that it is on Steam.

### Signalis

Signalis was another game that I received on recommendation of the Architect of
Games YouTube channel. And I should have read the tags: it's a Lovecraftian
horror game; not "something fun" to start one random evening... ^^;;

Oh well. The game itself is interesting, although the story requires some
thought, familiarity with works like "The King in Yellow" and other
eldritch/weird horror stories, and interpretation/analysis. You play as Elster,
an LSTR unit, searching for her missing companion after their ship crashed on a
remote planet with an underground mining operation. However, (surprise surprise)
the mine seems abandoned, and as you travel further down you begin to encounter
its former workers, different types of units, which have turned into monsters.

You do not have much health, and the game only lets you carry 6 items in your
inventory at any time (there are synchronised storage crates in safe-rooms, for
storing extra items and swapping loadouts), making it a fun challenge balancing
healing items, weapons, ammunition, and the strategies you want to employ when
traversing the mining complex. The sound design is fabulously unnerving (there
are tunable radios), and the plot equally so. If you're looking for a different
type of game and don't mind the horror aspects, Signalis is probably for you.

### Celeste

Celeste is an extremely highly acclaimed puzzle-platformer. It was released in
2018, but I returned to it this year to play through it with more dedication
than I had previously. Not only did I end up doing a full run, but I managed to
get obsessed enough to earn 100% of its achievements.

The game is probably as close to perfect games can get, no other way to put it.
The soundtrack, story, level design, and characters are woven together so
nicely, complementing each other in different ways and by different amounts
depending on the stage in the game, that the flow of the game is unlike anything
else I've experienced. The game is about the main character, Madeline, trying to
climb Celeste mountain, mainly just to prove that she can. But it quickly
becomes clear that the mountain is more than it lets on, as the game takes the
player through an extremely well-written story exploring anxiety, mental health,
depression, tenacity, pressure, and dealing with one's inner demons. And it
manages to do this without any of it feeling forced or corny; it seems very
honest.

Celeste is very challenging, but exemplary in accessibility settings: the game
speed, stamina, number of dashes, etc. can all be configured in case the default
difficulty is simply too high. You still earn all the achievements, and you can
always turn it back up if you find it being too easy or want to try the default
after you've practised with different settings. Each level is also very fair;
nothing requires pixel-perfect timing or anything like that. This also leads to
some frustration, as every death means you know pretty much exactly what you did
wrong. But that makes it so much more fun and satisfying when you finally get a
room done.

There's plenty of bonus, more challenging, content once the base story has been
completed. And finally, there is the free Chapter 9 DLC: "Farewell". It is the
final challenge for fans of the game, and even though it took me almost as long
to beat that single chapter as it did the rest of the game and bonus content, I
played it through a second time, just because it flows _so well_ and blends
story, music, and gameplay exquisitely!

### Hades

I really wanted to like "Hades"; I've played previous Supergiant games and
thoroughly enjoyed their stories and gameplay. However, I found Hades' final
boss, and the way to reach it, somewhat arbitrary in difficulty (maybe I just
need to "git gud"). And while I am interested in what the story is and how the
relationships between the characters develop, I am not interested enough
compared to the overall difficulty that I want to clear the game at least 6
times --- once with each weapon --- along with extra clears to get the random
encounter for the tens of supporting characters, in order to get a complete
picture of what happened and how each character is. Which is a shame because it
_is_ a good story, and the voice actors they've hired have done a spectacular
job of their roles (did I mention every character is voiced? No? It's pretty
cool!). But again, maybe I just need to "git gud". And if you like difficult
rogue-likes, Hades might very well be for you.

### Alba: A Wildlife Adventure

TODO: green notebook

### Furi

Furi is an extremely challenging boss-rush game. It is probably the hardest game
I have played. You play as a mysterious character locked up in a high-security
space prison, and you have to escape by fighting each section's "Guardian".
There is a story, which is revealed throughout the fights, and the ending when
you finally break free is really well done. It _is_ very difficult though, and
more in a "raw difficulty" kind of way than, for example, Celeste or Hollow
Knight, both of which are tough but fair. An exercise in frustration at times,
but a fun one (if you're into those kinds of games ^^) with a really good
soundtrack.

(The camera angles in-between fights are completely wack however, and the game
not automatically readjusting your input-direction-transformation when the
camera angle changes (until you let go of the joystick) makes for a very
confusing experience. You _can_ manually walk through the scenery to the next
fight, but there is a toggle for auto-walking, and I would recommend using it as
often as possible. Fortunately this only applies in-between fights, the camera
behaviour during fights is sensible and almost static.)

### Control

I enjoyed "Control", a paranatural, definitely-not-SCP-inspired game about the
main character "Jessie" searching for her brother, who was taken by the
mysterious "Federal Bureau of Control". There are powers like hovering and
telekinesis to play with, combine with your gun-fu to get to enemies, and to use
to explore previously unreachable areas of the map. However, I found that the
novelty of the powers wore off fairly quickly, although the fights were pretty
well-paced.

The game is playable on a Steam Deck, and I didn't mind the playthrough I got
out of it, nor the game's look on the Steam Deck. But there are so many
reflective surfaces, textured metal plates, and water puddles that the game was
clearly meant to be played on a GPU with dedicated ray tracing hardware. If you
have one of those, it probably looks _phenomenal_.

### Deep Rock Galactic

Deep Rock Galactic (DRG) is another game I didn't start in 2023, but still
warrants mentioning. "Danger, Darkness, Dwarves" is the description, and it
pretty much does what it says on the tin. You play as a dwarf on a space mining
rig, sent down in a crude "drop pod" to serve your corporate overlord's mining
interest, regardless of risk to your own life and limb. However, what makes this
game such a gem is how much it leans in to this otherwise depressing setting:
You're grumpy mining dwarves! In space! Every line is voiced exactly as I
imagine a grumpy dwarf on a mining rig would sound, including the management guy
who radios you your mission objectives and alerts you when a swarm of bugs is on
your way. Everything is themed around fantasy dwarf stereotypes, but make it
space mining, and it makes for great entertainment; the beers at the corporate
bar is what give you your buffs before each mission, for example! It's great! ^^

DRG can be played solo, although thanks to a very well-implemented ping system
(and the community being friendly in general) I have joined random missions and
had strangers join my missions, and had a blast each time. There is also voice
chat, if you like that. By default the team size is 4, one for each class (or a
different sub-arrangement if you wish), although I hear that can be adjusted
with mods (which I assume then have to be installed for all players who want to
join).

**Rock and Stone!**


## Books

### Becky Chambers' books

Some years ago, a friend of mine recommended the first of the Becky Chambers
books: "The Long Way to a Small, Angry Planet". I picked it up around Christmas
that year, read it in (I think) a day, and _immediately_ turned it over and
re-read it; it was that good.

It was sci-fi like I had never read before: intrictate, and with detailed
characters; amazing dialogue and interactions; refreshingly diverse species (as
in, not "Oh look! In this Milky Way of ours with literally billions of stars,
somehow every species is humanoid."); plot, scheming, secrets; glimpses of
technological and scientific explosions that were so cool and interesting, yet
didn't seem completely magic (for lack of a better term) or illogical. There's
also small sprinkles of anthropology throughout the books, and it makes for
highly entertaining musings on what "normal" is, in an intergalactic commons
context.

It's not a space opera; nobody is The Chosen One, destined to save the universe
(tm). That might put some people off, and that's fair. But I personally found it
incredibly refreshing, and all the more enjoyable, to read and experience the
story of humans and aliens, and their interactions, that still felt relatable
and humane. The plot, conflicts, relationships, interactions, etc.  weren't
grandiose; and yet they were. (Much in the same way as life, I guess.)

Anyway. I have since picked up each of the "Wayfarer" novels (of which "The Long
Way [...]" is the first), and although they are (mostly) independent and with
different casts, they are all a wonderfully... cosy-whilst-thrilling, I think
I'll call it. And each one brings something fresh, a new idea / a new
plot-point, meaning I never felt like the stories were boring or "simply"
expanding on existing story for the sake of it.

Chambers' novella "Monk and Robot"-series are her more recent books, set in a
more solarpunk kind of world. But there are fun new religions (like one whose
symbol is a bear eating honey, and the religion is focused on comfort and good
food), an interesting world to explore along with thoughts on AI, mortality, and
(indirectly) the meaning of life. Delightfully Zen.

At this point, I will pick up anything she publishes without hesitation, and
they're my go-to books for a nice afternoon in on a rainy day  : )

### The House of Sorrowing Stars (Beth Cartwright)

Personally found it disappointing. Lots of good ideas, but not quite put
together into a satisfying story.
Instalove is not my thing and felt misplaced? awkward?

### Monstress (Marjorie Liu and Sana Takeda)

Okay, this one I've technically been following for 7 years, but I picked up
"Volume 8: Inferno" last month and it just continues to be excellent. The art is
gorgeous, with clear inspiration from the Jugenstil/Art Nouveau movement, mixed
with a healthy amount of Steam Punk, but that wouldn't matter too much if the
story wasn't good. If you hadn't guessed, it thankfully is. We've got political
plots, intrigue, and mystique, spread between a religious cult, immortal
demi-gods from an unknown world, talking cats with multiple tails (and
warrior-poets!), humans, and "arcanics", which are children of the humans and
the demi-gods. But no faction is perfect either, there are internal conflicts,
corruption, all that good stuff that makes for really nice and deep storytelling
about a world in a post-war, delicate state.

It also has one of the aspects I respect enormously in a story, especially one
set in a plotting, post-war, grim world: it doesn't shy away from hurting its
cast or characters. Battles are fought, sieges are laid, sabotages are
conducted, and never is it "And the heroes made it because they're the heroes."
or "And the cute ones were unscathed because war never affects the innocent."
The fights are fair and realistic, with every dirty trick you would expect from
highly powerful, definitely-not-quite-at-war factions applied, and if the main
character would lose a limb, they do. Characters which were introduced but run
into an infernal monster? They get killed by said monster. And I respect that.

It also deals very nicely, in my opinion, with the mental state of its
characters and how that changes based on the events that they encounter. I'm
looking forward to see where the story gets taken now that it seems it's
potentially reached the endgame.

### The Infinity Particle (Wendy Xu)

On a completely different note to Monstress, "The Infinity Particle" is a strong
recommend to anyone who's familiar with the Becky Chambers novels and want
_more_. It's a sweet, but short, story set in a near-ish future on Mars. About a
tech intern, a human-like sentient robot, and narcissism (okay, that part is not
sweet, but it is key to the story). There are many interesting little thoughts
about what a world with conscious AI would be like, mutual respect in
relationships both platonic and non, as well as power structures. I think it
might be aimed at more of a young-adult audience, but it scratched that "cosy
space sci-fi" itch for me  ^^

### The Three-Body Problem and The Dark Forest (Cixin Liu)

TODO: I have mixed feelings about these. But they're generally good (I think).


### Others

I enjoyed these, and miraculously even had time to write a bit more about it.

* [N.K. Jemisin's "Broken Earth Trilogy"](/en/post/go-read-the-broken-earth-trilogy),
    of which the first book is
    [The Fifth Season](/en/post/fifth-season).
* ["The Starless Sea" by Erin Morgenstern](/en/post/the-starless-sea)

